## Original Data

- [source](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip) 
- [description](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones)

## Data Transformation Steps

The `run_analysis.R` script carries out the following:

1. Download the source file into the current working directory if it is not already present.

2. Load the data from inside the zip file:
    1. The training and test data for the measurements (X), the activities (Y) and subjects (S) are loaded from the train and test folders.
    2. The features are loaded from features.txt.
    3. The activity labels are loaded from activity_labels.txt.
    4. The loading is carried out by loadData(), which takes the zip file and returns a list containing 8 data frames (corresponding to train and test data for X, Y, and S, and features and activities).
3. The training and test data for X, Y and S are merged. 
	- This is done via the mergeData() function which takes in the list from step 2 and returns a new list with three data frames - X, Y and S.
	- After the merged list is got, the six columns corresponding to X, Y and S data frames in the original list are discarded to save memory.
4. Measurements that are not means or standard deviations are filtered out of X.
	- This is done via the extract\_mean\_std\_features() function. This takes in the measurements data frame and the features data frame, and returns a new data frame with only the relevant features.
	- The target features are identified as those with -mean() or -std() in their names. This is done via grepping with the pattern <code>"-mean\\(\\)|-std\\(\\)"</code> on the second column of the features data frame.
	- This function also adjusts the column names to be the lowercased feature name stripped of '(' and ')'s.
5. The activity names are applied.
	- This is done via the apply\_activity\_names() function. This takes in the activity indices (Y) and the activities data frame, and returns a matrix with the activity labels.
	- The new matrix has a single column, and the name "activity" is applied to that column.
	- The returned matrix is used as the new activities matrix (Y).
	- Once this is done, the initially loaded list is discarded as it is no longer needed.
6. The name "subject" is applied to the single column of the subjects data frame.
7. The first tidy data frame is got by combining the subjects, activities, and measurements frames. 
	- This is done using cbind.
	- The first column of the resulting frame represents the subject, the second the activity and the remaining columns represent the corresponding measurements.
	- The tidy dataset has 10299 rows and 68 columns.
8. This first tidy data frame is written to "tidy.txt" using write.csv.
9. The tidy data set is melted using the first two columns as the identity. 
10. The melted data is aggregated  by "mean" for each subject and identity.
	- The aggregated data frame has 180 rows and 68 columns - the first two representing subject and activity, and the remaining ones holding the average or each mean / std measure got that particular subject-activity pair.
11. The aggregated data frame is written out to "tidy2.txt" as the second output.

## Variable Descriptions

The output data is generated by transforming data in the input zip source file mentioned in the Original Data section. The source has a file called "features_info.txt", which describes the variables in detail.

There are 66 features in the source that correspond to means and standard deviations. The output files both have 68 columns - 1 for subject, 1 for activity, and the remaining 66 columns corresponding to the 66 mean and standard deviation features. 

### tidy.txt
- This file holds all the measurements of the 66 features for each subject and activity.

###tidy2.txt
- This file holds the averages for each mean / standard deviation measurement for each subject-activity pair.

## Data Columns

1. subject
2. activity
3. tbodyacc.mean.x
4. tbodyacc.mean.y
5. tbodyacc.mean.z
6. tbodyacc.std.x
7. tbodyacc.std.y
8. tbodyacc.std.z
9. tgravityacc.mean.x
10. tgravityacc.mean.y
11. tgravityacc.mean.z
12. tgravityacc.std.x
13. tgravityacc.std.y
14. tgravityacc.std.z
15. tbodyaccjerk.mean.x
16. tbodyaccjerk.mean.y
17. tbodyaccjerk.mean.z
18. tbodyaccjerk.std.x
19. tbodyaccjerk.std.y
20. tbodyaccjerk.std.z
21. tbodygyro.mean.x
22. tbodygyro.mean.y
23. tbodygyro.mean.z
24. tbodygyro.std.x
25. tbodygyro.std.y
26. tbodygyro.std.z
27. tbodygyrojerk.mean.x
28. tbodygyrojerk.mean.y
29. tbodygyrojerk.mean.z
30. tbodygyrojerk.std.x
31. tbodygyrojerk.std.y
32. tbodygyrojerk.std.z
33. tbodyaccmag.mean
34. tbodyaccmag.std
35. tgravityaccmag.mean
36. tgravityaccmag.std
37. tbodyaccjerkmag.mean
38. tbodyaccjerkmag.std
39. tbodygyromag.mean
40. tbodygyromag.std
41. tbodygyrojerkmag.mean
42. tbodygyrojerkmag.std
43. fbodyacc.mean.x
44. fbodyacc.mean.y
45. fbodyacc.mean.z
46. fbodyacc.std.x
47. fbodyacc.std.y
48. fbodyacc.std.z
49. fbodyaccjerk.mean.x
50. fbodyaccjerk.mean.y
51. fbodyaccjerk.mean.z
52. fbodyaccjerk.std.x
53. fbodyaccjerk.std.y
54. fbodyaccjerk.std.z
55. fbodygyro.mean.x
56. fbodygyro.mean.y
57. fbodygyro.mean.z
58. fbodygyro.std.x
59. fbodygyro.std.y
60. fbodygyro.std.z
61. fbodyaccmag.mean
62. fbodyaccmag.std
63. fbodybodyaccjerkmag.mean
64. fbodybodyaccjerkmag.std
65. fbodybodygyromag.mean
66. fbodybodygyromag.std
67. fbodybodygyrojerkmag.mean
68. fbodybodygyrojerkmag.std
